feat: add flux auto deployment post (#50)
mesosphere/d2iq-engineering-blog: content/posts/flux-auto-deployment/index.md

---
authors: ["mstruebing"]
title: "Automatic deployment updates with Flux"
date: 2022-12-24T09:01:22+01:00
featured: false
tags: ["flux", "kubernetes", "gitops"]

> excerpt: Learn how to install Flux, deploy an application with it and configure automatic updates whenever a new version is published.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
excerpt: Learn how to install Flux, deploy an application with it, and configure automatic updates whenever a new version is published.
```

feature_image: feature.png
---

# Flux, from installation to automatically updating deployment in 30 minutes

## What are we doing?

> In this article, we will set up Flux on a Kubernetes cluster, deploy an application via Flux
> and configure it to automatically update the used container image whenever there is a new version available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this article, we set up Flux on a Kubernetes cluster, deploy an application via Flux,
and then configure it to automatically update the used container image whenever there is a new version available.
```

> We will deploy this sample hello world website: https://github.com/mstruebing/static-sample

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We deploy this sample hello world website: https://github.com/mstruebing/static-sample
```

Reviewer: I'm just removing the "will" (future tense) - so this makes it all present tense.
IE changing "we will install..." to simply "we install..." - makes for a little easier reading.

which is set up to automatically build and push a new docker image tagged as the current timestamp to DockerHub whenever there is a new commit.
Look into the `index.html`, `Dockerfile` and `.github/workflows/ci.yaml` files to get a sense of what the application is doing.

The full Flux repository can be found here: https://github.com/mstruebing/flux-demo where every step is a single commit.

## What is Flux and the advantages of GitOps

I could try to explain flux in depth here, but I will never be as good as the official documentation.
So I will keep it short and if you want to know more I recommend reading the following pages:

- [Flux components](https://fluxcd.io/flux/components/)
- [Flux from end to end](https://fluxcd.io/flux/flux-e2e/)

Let's explain a couple of terms first:

- Infrastructure as code: This is a way to describe your infrastructure in a declarative way with code

> - GitOps: A way to automatically update your infrastructure to match the definition of your infrastructure as code from a git repository

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- GitOps: A way to automatically update your infrastructure to match the definition of your infrastructure as code from a git repository.
```

Now we can say that Flux is a GitOps solution for Kubernetes.

> That means Flux manages to apply your infrastructure as code-defined infrastructure from a Git repository to your Kubernetes cluster in an automated way.

Author: Do you really want to remove the `.` at the end?

> That means Flux manages to apply your infrastructure as code-defined infrastructure from a Git repository to your Kubernetes cluster in an automated way.

Reviewer 2: :joy: No :disappointed:

- You can deploy fast, easily and often by a push to a repository
- You can run a `git revert` if you messed up your environment and everything is like it was before
- This means you can easily roll back to every state of your application or infrastructure
- Not everyone needs access to the actual infrastructure environment, access to the git repository is enough to manage the infrastructure
- Self-documenting infrastructure, you do not need to ssh into a server and look around running services or explore all resources on a Kubernetes cluster
- Easy to create a demo environment by replicating the repository or creating a second deploy target

## Installing flux

We need a Kubernetes cluster up and running, the amount of nodes doesn't matter.
We need the Flux CLI installed on our local system you can have a look at how to install it here: https://fluxcd.io/flux/installation/

If you have installed the Flux CLI and have configured `kubectl` to be connected with the right cluster you can run `flux check --pre` to make sure your cluster is ready to get flux installed.

Now we need a personal access token for GitHub, you can create it here: https://github.com/settings/tokens

> Generate a new token and check everything under repo.

Reviewer: Recommend converting these to process steps below to numbered bullets - makes it easier to follow.

Export your GitHub user name and your newly created token:

```sh
$ export GITHUB_USER="<YOUR_USERNAME>"
$  export GITHUB_TOKEN="<TOKEN>"
```

> Tip: when you add a space in front of any shell command this command will not be available in your shell history.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tip: When you add a space in front of any shell command, this command is not available in your shell history.
```

Install flux with this command, I use `clusters/lab` here as my path because that's what my Kubernetes cluster is called and that way it's easier to set up this repository for multiple clusters.

```sh
flux bootstrap github \
 --owner=$GITHUB_USER \
 --repository=flux-demo \
 --path=clusters/lab \
 --personal
```

> This will install flux on your cluster, creates the git repository in case it doesn't exist yet, adds a deploy key to the repository and pushes all the needed resources into the repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This installs flux on your cluster, creates the git repository in case it doesn't exist yet, adds a deploy key to the repository and pushes all the needed resources into the repository.
```

```

Now, if we look into the newly created `flux-system` namespace we can see that
there are a couple of resources created:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods -n flux-system
NAME                                       READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
helm-controller-56fc8dd99d-rbnwc           1/1     Running   0          5m23s
notification-controller-644f548fb6-rzzgk   1/1     Running   0          5m23s
source-controller-7f66565fb8-xths9         1/1     Running   0          5m23s
kustomize-controller-bc455c688-4ctrv       1/1     Running   0          5m23s
```

These are needed and come with the default installation of flux, we will later add
other controllers too.

We also have a new resource type `gitrepositories.source.toolkit.fluxcd.io` where we can see
our repository:

```sh
$ kubectl get gitrepositories.source.toolkit.fluxcd.io -n flux-system
NAME          URL                                         AGE     READY   STATUS
flux-system   ssh://git@github.com/mstruebing/flux-demo   8m22s   True    stored artifact for revision 'main/a20fd2de7c87ed86c0fb48caa1ba56ebf2ff4e77'
```

And now we have successfully installed flux on our cluster.

## Deploying our sample application

> What we need to do to deploy our sample application is to create a kustomization
> for flux to tell flux what to do and where to find it and what resources it needs to create.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To deploy our sample application we need to create a kustomization
to tell flux where to find our application definition in git.
```

First, start with cloning the repository flux created on our local machine.
We will execute the next steps from the root of the repository.

```sh

> mkdir -p clusters/lab && \
> flux create kustomization static-sample \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
mkdir -p clusters/lab
flux create kustomization static-sample \
```

 --target-namespace=static-sample \
 --source=flux-system \
 --path="./clusters/lab/kustomize" \
 --prune=true \
 --interval=5m \
 --export > ./clusters/lab/static-kustomization.yaml
```

This will create the following kustomization:

```yaml
---
apiVersion: kustomize.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta2
kind: Kustomization
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: flux-system
spec:
  interval: 5m0s
  path: ./clusters/lab/kustomize
  prune: true
  sourceRef:
    kind: GitRepository
    name: flux-system
  targetNamespace: static-sample
```

This means: hey, look, this is a kustomization which is called static-sample and lives
in our flux repository in the path `./clusters/lab/kustomize`, please check this every 5 minutes

> and prune every resource which is not in the repository anymore (`prune: true`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and prune every resource which is no longer in the repository (`prune: true`).
```

> Now let's create this `kustomize` directory and add a namespace first before we add our other resources:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's create this `kustomize` directory and add a namespace first before we add our other resources:
```

> ```sh
> mkdir clusters/lab/kustomize && touch clusters/lab/kustomize/{kustomization,namespace}.yaml
> ```
> 
> ```yaml
> # namespace.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: v1
> kind: Namespace
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
> ```
> 
> ```yaml
> # kustomization.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
> kind: Kustomization
> resources:
>   - namespace.yaml
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
mkdir -p clusters/lab/kustomize
cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/namespace.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Namespace
metadata:
  name: static-sample
EOF
cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/kustomization.yaml <<'EOF'
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - namespace.yaml
EOF
```
```

If we now push these changes up, we should shortly see a namespace popping up on our
Kubernetes cluster. You can use `kubectl get ns --watch` until it's there.

```sh
$ kubectl get ns
NAME              STATUS   AGE
default           Active   316d
kube-system       Active   316d
kube-public       Active   316d
kube-node-lease   Active   316d
flux-system       Active   26m
static-sample     Active   15s
```

Now let's add all our other resources to make this application available on the cluster.

```sh
touch clusters/lab/kustomize/{deployment,service,ingress}.yaml
```

```yaml
# kustomization.yaml
---
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - namespace.yaml
  - deployment.yaml
  - service.yaml
  - ingress.yaml
```

```yaml
# deployment.yaml
---

> apiVersion: apps/v1
> kind: Deployment
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   replicas: 1
>   selector:
>     matchLabels:
>       app: static-sample
>   template:
>     metadata:
>       labels:
>         app: static-sample
>     spec:
>       containers:
>         - image: mstruebing/static-sample:1666603774
>           imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
>           name: static-sample
> ```
> 
> ```yaml
> # service.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: v1
> kind: Service
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   ports:
>     - name: http
>       port: 80
>       protocol: TCP
>       targetPort: 80
>   selector:
>     app: static-sample
> ```
> 
> ```yaml
> # ingress.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
> kind: Ingress
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   rules:
>     - host: static.lab.cluster
>       http:
>         paths:
>           - backend:
>               service:
>                 name: static-sample
>                 port:
>                   name: http
>             path: /
>             pathType: Prefix
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/deployment.yaml <<'EOF' 
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: static-sample
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: static-sample
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: static-sample
    spec:
      containers:
        - image: mstruebing/static-sample:1666603774
          imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
          name: static-sample
EOF

cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/service.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: static-sample
spec:
  ports:
    - name: http
      port: 80
      protocol: TCP
      targetPort: 80
  selector:
    app: static-sample
EOF

cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/ingress.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: networking.k8s.io/v1
kind: Ingress
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: static-sample
spec:
  rules:
    - host: static.lab.cluster
      http:
        paths:
          - backend:
              service:
                name: static-sample
                port:
                  name: http
            path: /
            pathType: Prefix
EOF

cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/kustomization.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: kustomize.config.k8s.io/v1beta1
kind: Kustomization
resources:
  - namespace.yaml
  - deployment.yaml
  - service.yaml
  - ingress.yaml
EOF
```
```

As this cluster is running on my local network I will edit my `/etc/hosts` file

> to map the ip of the control plane node to the host I've added as the ingress rule.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to map the IP address of the control plane node to the host I've added as the ingress rule.
```

```

When the resources are there the output should look similar to this:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods,ingress,service,deployment -n static-sample
NAME                                READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
pod/static-sample-9fb66bf4d-9ph2k   1/1     Running   0          107s

NAME                                      CLASS    HOSTS                ADDRESS                                                                                                                                                                                                             PORTS   AGE
ingress.networking.k8s.io/static-sample   <none>   static.lab.cluster   192.168.0.85,192.168.0.86,192.168.0.87,192.168.0.88,2a02:8108:483f:b989:3030:f80:38c4:197f,2a02:8108:483f:b989:34f9:beed:feb1:7fb,2a02:8108:483f:b989:db5b:2ada:2817:7e3c,2a02:8108:483f:b989:f5ea:87f6:69b0:4e0a   80      107s

NAME                    TYPE        CLUSTER-IP      EXTERNAL-IP   PORT(S)   AGE
service/static-sample   ClusterIP   10.43.219.195   <none>        80/TCP    107s

NAME                            READY   UP-TO-DATE   AVAILABLE   AGE
deployment.apps/static-sample   1/1     1            1           107s
```

> So now, when the resources are there we can go to http://static.lab.cluster/ and should see our website.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the resources are there we can go to http://static.lab.cluster/ and should see our website.
```

If you are following along, try to change the number of replicas and see what happens.

## Automatic image update

What we did works, but it has one disadvantage if we want full automation.
Whenever we change something in our application we manually need to update the image tag
on our deployment.

While this could be something you would want to do depending on your use case, I do not in this example.

In order to do this we need to install flux with some additional components: the image reflector and image automation controllers.

Let's uninstall flux and install it again with the needed components, don't worry, as we have everything
set up in our repository it is no effort to get into this state again.

```sh
$ flux uninstall --namespace=flux-system
$ flux bootstrap github \
  --components-extra=image-reflector-controller,image-automation-controller \
  --owner=mstruebing \
  --repository=flux-demo \
  --branch=main \
  --path=clusters/lab \
  --read-write-key \
  --personal
```

> If we now look at the pods running in our `flux-system`-namespace we can see the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If we look at the pods running in our `flux-system`-namespace we can see the
```

controllers for our special components running:

```sh
$ kubectl get pods -n flux-system
NAME                                           READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
image-automation-controller-64dd99c7b6-rxsq8   1/1     Running   0          106s
source-controller-7f66565fb8-b5fnx             1/1     Running   0          106s
notification-controller-644f548fb6-66464       1/1     Running   0          106s
image-reflector-controller-7576c9cc77-ggjcs    1/1     Running   0          106s
helm-controller-56fc8dd99d-hbvfl               1/1     Running   0          106s
kustomize-controller-bc455c688-dwflv           1/1     Running   0          106s
```

> Now we need to add an image repository which defines which repository to use for the image,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need to add an image repository which defines which repository to use for the image,
```

> an image policy which defines which image tags to use and how to order them and an image update automation which defines how we want to update our deployment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
an image policy which defines which image tags to use and how to order them,
and an image update automation which defines how we want to update our deployment.
```

Make sure to pull the repository first before following along as flux committed some
files to the repository with the latest flux installation.

```sh
flux create image repository static-sample \
--image=mstruebing/static-sample \
--namespace=static-sample \
--interval=1m \
--export > ./clusters/lab/static-sample-registry.yaml
```

```sh
flux create image policy static-sample \
--image-ref=static-sample \
--namespace=static-sample \
--select-semver=5.0.x \
--export > ./clusters/lab/static-sample-policy.yaml
```

We need to adjust the image policy to the following:

> ```yaml
> # clusters/lab/static-sample-policy.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: image.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta1
> kind: ImagePolicy
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   imageRepositoryRef:
>     name: static-sample
>   filterTags:
>     pattern: "^(?P<ts>.*)"
>     extract: "$ts"
>   policy:
>     numerical:
>       order: asc

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
cat >clusters/lab/static-sample-policy.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: image.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta1
kind: ImagePolicy
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: static-sample
spec:
  imageRepositoryRef:
    name: static-sample
  filterTags:
    pattern: "^(?P<ts>.*)"
    extract: "$ts"
  policy:
    numerical:
      order: asc
EOF
```

```

This means that we want to extract the timestamp from the image and sort them ascending to always

> have the newest image available. You can find a lot of other examples in the flux documentation: https://fluxcd.io/docs/components/image/imagepolicies/#examples .

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
have the newest image available. You can find a lot of other examples in the flux documentation: [https://fluxcd.io/docs/components/image/imagepolicies/#examples].

> Now we need to tell our deployment that it should use the image from the freshly created `ImagePolicy`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We need to tell our deployment that it should use the image from the freshly created `ImagePolicy`:
```

> ```yaml
> # deployment.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: apps/v1
> kind: Deployment
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   replicas: 1
>   selector:
>     matchLabels:
>       app: static-sample
>   template:
>     metadata:
>       labels:
>         app: static-sample
>     spec:
>       containers:
>         - image: mstruebing/static-sample:1666603774 # {"$imagepolicy": "static-sample:static-sample"}
>           imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
>           name: static-sample

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```sh
cat > clusters/lab/kustomize/deployment.yaml <<'EOF'
---
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: static-sample
  namespace: static-sample
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: static-sample
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: static-sample
    spec:
      containers:
        - image: mstruebing/static-sample:1666603774 # {"$imagepolicy": "static-sample:static-sample"}
          imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
          name: static-sample
EOF
```

```

> We update the image to contain the comment `# {"$imagepolicy": "static-sample:static-sample"}` which needs to match the namespace and name of the `ImagePolicy`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have updated the image to contain the comment `# {"$imagepolicy": "static-sample:static-sample"}` which needs to match the namespace and name of the `ImagePolicy`.
```

> Now the last part is to create our image update automation with the following command:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The last part is to create our image update automation with the following command:
```

```sh
flux create image update static-sample \
--namespace=static-sample \

> --git-repo-ref=flux-system \

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
--git-repo-namespace=flux-system \
--git-repo-ref=flux-system \
```

--git-repo-path="./clusters/lab" \
--checkout-branch=main \
--push-branch=main \
--author-name=fluxcdbot \
--author-email=fluxcdbot@users.noreply.github.com \
--commit-template="{{range .Updated.Images}}{{println .}}{{end}}" \
--export > ./clusters/lab/static-sample-automation.yaml
```

We need to manually edit the file as our source repository is in a different namespace:

> 
> ```yaml
> # static-sample-automation.yaml
> ---
> apiVersion: image.toolkit.fluxcd.io/v1beta1
> kind: ImageUpdateAutomation
> metadata:
>   name: static-sample
>   namespace: static-sample
> spec:
>   git:
>     checkout:
>       ref:
>         branch: main
>     commit:
>       author:
>         email: fluxcdbot@users.noreply.github.com
>         name: fluxcdbot
>       messageTemplate: "{{range .Updated.Images}}{{println .}}{{end}}"
>     push:
>       branch: main
>   interval: 1m0s
>   sourceRef:
>     kind: GitRepository
>     name: flux-system
>     namespace: flux-system
>   update:
>     path: ./clusters/lab
>     strategy: Setters
> ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Why do you want to delete that whole thing?

Author: I converted it to the `cat <FILE> <<'EOF'`-style.

Reviewer 2: Because the git repository namespace was set in https://github.com/mesosphere/d2iq-engineering-blog/pull/50#discussion_r1061352043

Reviewer 2: I've removed it - it was redundant.

imageupdateautomation/static-sample     2022-10-24T13:22:05+02:00       False           True      no updates made
```

We can see flux found some tags in the repository and we can see to which tag the latest version is resolved.

Now, let's push an update to our sample application and change the Hello World!

```sh
echo 'Hello World!!111!einself' > index.html && \
  git add . && \
  git commit -m 'add better hello world' && \
  git push origin main
```

We need to wait for the GitHub Action to build and push the image, we can monitor the flux updates in the meantime with:

```sh
watch flux get images all -n static-sample
```

When it will be ready you will see that the image tag changed, the amount of tags found and the last commit is changed.

If we now go back to our website we can see our changes there:

![website after](website-after.png)

That's it, you can do a lot more with Flux and what I did may not be the optimal way of doing this.
But it works for me and I deploy some applications on a real Kubernetes cluster like this without issues.

The Flux documentation contains all of this information but it could be hard to find your way around

> with no experience, I decided to write that blog post and hopefully inspire some people to try it out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with no experience, so I decided to write that blog post and hopefully inspire some people to try it out.
```
